Project Proposal: Evolutionary trade-offs in a predator-prey relationship

Introduction and Background

As globalization and anthropogenic climate change increase, previously stable ecosystems are 
being threatened by invasive species and temperature rise. While these changes are on too small 
of a time scale to allow species-wide evolution, individual organisms in local communities are 
able to undergo a rapid adaptation in order to cope with a changing environment (3). This 
phenotypic plasticity takes form in several ways. Arthropods acclimating to higher temperatures 
in order to resist desiccation is an example of responding to environmental change (2), while 
intertidal snails developing thicker shells in the presence of predatory crabs (7) and plants 
increasing their amount of defense glands (1) are defense strategies developed to resist predation. 

While the latter form of phenotypic plasticity is effective in reducing the number of species 
consumed by predators, evidence suggests that it comes at the cost of growth and reproductive 
ability in plant organisms. For plants in areas with high levels of resource availability, growth 
rate and secondary metabolism – responsible for herbivore-resistant defenses – are inversely 
related; the more nutrients being dedicated to defense, the less available for growth (4). 
Additionally, a greater presence of herbivores inciting an increase in defensive structures and a 
reduction in floral volatile organic compounds causes reduced attraction of plants to pollinators, 
leading to delayed flowering, lower seed production, and ultimately less reproduction (5).

Questions and Goals

The knowledge that plants must sacrifice reproductive ability in order to develop greater 
predatory defenses does not inherently give rise to conclusions regarding the extent to which this 
trade-off effects persistence or the optimal amount of defense required to thrive in the presence 
of a predator. Therefore, with this study I plan to answer the question: Which strategies, in terms 
of the ratio of defensive ability to reproductive ability, yield the strongest population of a plant 
species in the presence of a predator?

Methodological Approach

This plant-herbivore relationship will be modeled using a spatially-explicit two species lattice 
model. Cells will be updated asynchronously according to rules derived from the defensive and 
reproductive abilities of the plant species; mainly, high defensive ability reduces the probability 
of the plant being colonized by the herbivore while low reproductive ability reduces the 
probability of the plant colonizing an empty cell. The defensive ability and reproductive ability 
of the plant species will be selected using one of several curves modeled after the theta logistic 
curve (6), and will remain continuous throughout each simulation because reproduction is 
assumed to be asexual. The size of the plant population will be measured after simulating the 
dynamics for several thousand time steps.

Expectations and Implications

The expected outcome of this study is a definite proportion of defensive ability to reproductive 
ability which causes the most successful plant species in a predatory relationship. This result will 
likely be one (or more) of three possible outcomes: low reproductive and high defensive ability, 
low defensive and high reproductive ability, or moderately low reproductive and defensive 
ability - a high reproductive and defensive ability is unlikely due to resource limitation (1). 

Once quantified, this outcome will give insight as to which of the two traits are more important 
in plant persistence, and allow ecologists to adapt their strategies in conservation and invasive 
species mitigation accordingly. Further research could expand this study to involve competition 
between more than two species and account for non-plant organisms. 

Key References

1. Agrawal, A. A. Phenotypic Plasticity in the Interactions and Evolution of Species. Science 
294, 321–326 (2001).

2. Chown, S. L., Slabber, S., McGeoch, M. A., Janion, C. & Leinaas, H. P. Phenotypic plasticity 
mediates climate change responses among invasive and indigenous arthropods. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 274, 2531–2537 (2007).

3. Fussmann, G. F. & Gonzalez, A. Evolutionary rescue can maintain an oscillating community 
undergoing environmental change. Interface Focus 3, 20130036 (2013).

4. Herms, D. A. & Mattson, W. J. The Dilemma of Plants: To Grow or Defend. The Quarterly 
Review of Biology 67, 283–335 (1992).

5. Schiestl, F. P., Kirk, H., Bigler, L., Cozzolino, S. & Desurmont, G. A. Herbivory and floral 
signaling: phenotypic plasticity and tradeoffs between reproduction and indirect defense. New 
Phytol 203, 257–266 (2014).

6. Sibly, R. M., Barker, D., Denham, M. C., Hone, J. & Pagel, M. On the Regulation of 
Populations of Mammals, Birds, Fish, and Insects. Science 309, 607–610 (2005).

7. Trussell, G. C. Phenotypic Plasticity in an Intertidal Snail: The Role of a Common Crab 
Predator. Evolution 50, 448–454 (1996).
